From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is the Daily.
[Music]
When Republicans passed their big
domestic policy bill just over a week
ago, they kept making the same argument
about sweeping changes to Medicaid that
were key to the law.
>> There are now work requirements for
Medicaid, as there should be. The
American people want that. that the
measures, including new work
requirements, would only encourage
able-bodied adults to earn their
healthcare, ultimately creating a fairer
system for everyone.
>> You ought to be working to prove that
you're not taking the Medicaid benefits
away for people who they were intended
for in the first place.
>> Critics said the opposite.
>> All this is is more red tape meant to
kick people who should get Medicaid off
of Medicaid. They predict millions of
working people who need healthcare would
lose it. I
>> mean, this is going to hit rural America
right in the face.
>> The truth will emerge in rural and often
red areas where cuts to Medicaid funding
will be felt most deeply. Today, I speak
to a family doctor in one of those
places, western North Carolina, about
what she thinks will happen to her
patients.
It's Monday, July 14th.
[Music]
>> Hi. Can you hear me?
>> Yep, we've got you.
>> Great. Um, I'm so happy to have you
here. I want to know, should I call you
Dr. Dowler, Shannon? What do you prefer?
>> Shannon is fine.
>> Okay, great. So Shannon, we are talking
to you today because of this giant bill
that President Trump just signed into
law. We know that North Carolina is
going to lose a lot of federal funding
for Medicaid and that a lot of people
may get kicked off Medicaid. Senator Tom
Tillis from North Carolina, he's one of
the few dissenting Republicans who voted
against the bill, kept saying that in
North Carolina more than 600,000 people
could lose coverage.
You are a doctor in rural North
Carolina. We know these cuts are going
to affect rural places the most.
Can you first start just by telling me
where you live and work?
>> Sure. So, I live in the mountains of
North Carolina up in Madison County.
It's about 45 minutes or so north of
Asheville in the Pisa National Forest.
And so I'm about a mile from the
Tennessee state line as the crow flies,
but it takes me 30 minutes to get to
Tennessee. Um, I sit on my porch and I
see the mountains in the distance. I
don't see anybody else's houses. I see
more cows than people and it I for me
it's very settling and and very
peaceful.
>> How long have you been practicing
medicine?
>> Gosh, over so I did residency in 99 to
2002 and I did a fellowship year. Um, so
over 20 years since residency. Wow. And
I have practiced in a variety of
settings, all focused on underserved
care from local health departments to
the free clinic, which is where I do
most of my clinical time now, as well as
with local health departments.
>> How close, just so I'm kind of
understanding where you're at, is the
nearest hospital to you?
>> Uh, the nearest hospital would be in
Asheville and it's about probably 50
minute to 60 minute drive depending on
traffic. We did have a hospital closer
in Irwin, Tennessee, but it got flooded
in Hurricane Helen and so has closed
down completely.
>> I want to just talk about your kind of
trajectory practicing. For most of the
time that you were practicing until
2023, Medicaid coverage in North
Carolina was pretty limited because this
was one of the states that was the very
last to expand Medicaid as part of the
Affordable Care Act. Right.
I'm wondering what was it like to
practice in North Carolina before the
expansion? Like how did people get their
health care? What did that look like?
It was often heartbreaking. There's
something in medicine we call compassion
fatigue where at the end of the day
sometimes you're so exhausted from
hearing the awful stories of people's
lives and healthcare experiences that
you're just exhausted. And we took care
of so many people that's had lives that
were ended or altered with preventable
diseases or curable diseases and instead
they died in their 40s or 50s and you
know they were working the working poor.
They were going to work every day but
couldn't afford health insurance. We did
the best we could to cobble together
their health care for them but at the
end of the day we couldn't amputate
their leg. you know, they would have to
see a surgeon for that and without
health insurance that was a challenge.
As far as putting their whole health
care picture together, it was often
impossible. Can you tell me about a few
people who really stick out to you from
that time, their experiences of not
having care kind of remain with you even
now?
>> Yes, there are a few people that just
weigh on me. One was a gentleman who in
his 50s had endstage liver disease. He
had hepatitis C infection um which is a
very curable infection if you have
access to medications and he also had
pretty significant bipolar disorder and
alcohol abuse and that combination with
no health insurance at all was deadly
for him. So, with his hepatitis C
infection, even if we could have found a
GI specialist who would take him as a
patient, um the problem is they wouldn't
treat his hepatitis if he was using any
alcohol at all, but we couldn't get him
into a psychiatrist to treat his bipolar
disorder, which is why he used the
alcohol was to deal with his sort of
crushing depression. So, it was just
this constant sort of undulating
healthc care experience. I I took care
of him for well over 5 years and I was
in the ICU with him an hour before he
died holding his hand and telling him
this was it. This was the last
hospitalization because he wasn't going
to make it through this one. And how
tragic that that was something that we
could have fixed for him and and we
didn't. He died from it.
>> And I'm wondering like would he have
qualified for Medicaid if there had been
an expansion?
>> Absolutely. he would have been the first
person to qualify.
>> Um, what I will say living sort of deep
in the rural Appalachin culture is that
a lot of people aren't going to show up
if they don't have a way to pay for it.
Even if it's a sliding scale, they they
feel like somebody else needs the
services more than they do or they're
just very humble and they don't want to
take something they can't pay for. At
one night clinic, uh, this story has
always really stuck with me. A woman in
her 40s came in to the night clinic.
She'd never been seen in our clinic
before um because of a complaint that
people in the choir wouldn't stand near
her
>> and she had started having an odor that
made her unpleasant to be near and she
had avoided health care because she
couldn't afford it and she was a
housekeeper. She had no access to any
health insurance and didn't want to
bankrupt her family. And so on exam that
night, she had a breast cancer that was
so advanced that it had grown through
her skin and that's where the smell was
coming from.
>> Wow. and she she ended up dying a few
months later. Um, we could have if she'd
gotten mammogs, you know, like we could
have caught this very very early and
treated her and she would have gone on
to be there for her family, but her fear
of bankruptcy
for seeking health care or maybe it was,
you know, she just didn't want to take
services from someone else. It's hard to
know what keeps people from walking in
the door. So I want to talk about when
Medicaid was expanded in North Carolina
and your experience of that after 2010
when Obamacare passes that's the
Affordable Care Act. What that law tries
to do is allow states to expand their
Medicaid coverage right to include many
more people so that you know the vast
majority of the working poor are covered
and the idea is the federal government
is going to pay for that or for most of
that but states have to sign up.
talk me through what happened initially
with North Carolina.
>> So, I was the chief medical officer of a
federally funded clinic in a rural
location at the time and it became
evident pretty quickly that it was
turning into a partisan issue and that
North Carolina was not going to
participate
>> and I felt like that could be a really
dangerous time for our state. And so I
spent the next decade like stumping. I
talked to anybody that would talk to me
about expansion, trying to get our
lawmakers to embrace expansion. And then
I made the decision to commute to
Raleigh so that I could be the chief
medical officer for North Carolina
Medicaid and then of course was there
when expansion finally happened. Can you
say more about that? Because it took a
really long time to get this expansion
in North Carolina. You know, it it just
happened like a couple years ago, more
than a decade after Obamacare passed.
And you said it got really partisan,
this debate over the expansion of
Medicaid. And I'm just I'm interested in
drilling down here with you on on what
made it so divisive. Like, do you think
that voters, lawmakers felt like this
was some kind of free handout to people?
What do you think? what was driving
their skepticism of the expansion?
>> Well, I can speak to North Carolina
specifically and at the time when
expansion started, North Carolina
Medicaid had had deficits for several
years in a row. They had exceeded their
budget. And so, at the same time that we
were trying to expand for more coverage,
the legislators were saying, "But wait a
second, you're breaking the piggy bank
uh because you're not managing your
program well enough." And so five years
in a row we hit budget. And I think that
probably was part of what helped the
legislators feel more comfortable that
maybe now's the time that we can expand
because we're not as afraid of that
historical budget shortfall.
It's interesting what you're saying is
initially there was some resistance just
because of the basic math here. Like you
had people saying, "Look, we can't
afford this. You know, even with the
subsidy, we can't afford to make this
program bigger." Is that right?
>> I think yes. And it was too much like
giving in to Obama and there was just a
piece of that that was real,
>> right? The partisan politics around
Obama.
>> Yeah. I I want to take you to the moment
after the expansion finally goes
through. What was that like, you know,
to practice in a state that all of a
sudden now is providing health insurance
to just so many more people? What did
that look like?
You could see the spirits lift of health
care and particularly the primary care
workforce. It doesn't matter what your
specialty was. You were finally able to
make referrals, get imaging studies,
order colonoscopies, do those things
that you knew were just good medicine. M
>> so there's a gentleman that I was taking
care of in his 30s, a farmer and a
terrible leg ulceration. He'd been
hospitalized twice and he refused to go
back to the hospital and he wouldn't go
to wound care because he didn't have any
way to pay for it.
>> Oh wow.
>> And the reason he wouldn't go back to
the hospital is there was no one to
manage his farm and because he felt like
people treated him badly. He was
uninsured. He knew he was uninsured and
he felt like he was treated as less
than.
>> He had shame around that.
>> So much shame. He would come to us in
the free clinic. We would beg him to be
admitted.
>> I even offered to go take care of his
farm. I was like, I will feed your
animals. Please go get hospitalized cuz
I So he wouldn't. But we started doing
home visits with him. And then
meanwhile, he got Medicaid coverage.
>> Wow. He started going to wound care. He
got into a regular primary care office.
So I mean, he went from someone who was
going to have his leg amputated. It was
that bad. It was gruesome to fully
healed and back to normal functioning
because he got coverage with Medicaid.
Just tell me for a farmer, a young
farmer in his 30s, what does that mean?
That kind of transformation just, you
know, for the trajectory of his life. I
mean, I I can't imagine how he would
have been able to keep doing his work
without a leg. He would have gone on
permanent disability. you know, he would
have cost our system so much more money
>> because he would literally have not been
able to work. I mean, we live in the
mountains. This is not even ground um to
work on a farm. You know, this would be
I'm not saying it's impossible. It would
be very difficult.
>> I mean, I'm struck by the fact that this
is someone who,
>> you know, is getting health insurance,
health coverage from the government.
that that's the thing that allows him to
work and continue being, you know, a
productive member of this community for
years and years to come potentially.
Absolutely. He's just not unique.
There's just stories like this
everywhere around how people's real
lives have been turned around.
They're everywhere.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Earlier this month, when the bill was
debated, many Republican lawmakers
struggled to justify changes to Medicaid
that they acknowledged would affect
their constituents in rural red parts of
the country. Dr. Dor was in DC talking
to members of Congress. I was up there
on Capitol Hill telling some of these
same stories to staffers and you know
legislative offices. One of them was
>> I asked her how they responded when she
shared these stories.
>> I mean they're impressed by them and
they're like wow that's really good.
Unfortunately there's too much fraud,
waste and abuse. So we sort of go back
to the rhetoric of but what about the
bad people? And I will say being a CMO
at Medicaid most of the fraud, waste and
abuse I was worried about was not coming
from the patients. It was, you know,
from the machine of healthcare and
people billing for services that maybe
they were not appropriately providing or
or misleading billing. It wasn't coming
from people, you know, faking that they
had the qualifications for Medicaid.
>> So, it sounds like you're saying there
is some fraud, waste, and abuse in this
program, right? It's just that you
disagree over where that's primarily
coming from.
>> Absolutely. They're going to spend twice
the amount of resources doing every
six-month eligibility checks rather than
every 12-month eligibility checks. And
counties are going to be in North
Carolina. Our counties are responsible
for doing this work. It's going to
double their burden without any
additional income.
>> It will literally our county
governments to have to do this. That is
not going to get folks where they want
to go with the budget of Medicaid. I'm
wondering what you make of work
requirements for Medicaid as somebody
that's been working within this program
for a very long time. This idea of
requiring that people demonstrate that
they're working in order to qualify has
been around for a while and it finally
makes it in the bill. What are your
thoughts on it?
>> I will say from my experience, the vast
majority of the patients I take care of
are working. they're doing jobs that um
don't bring in enough money or don't
have insurance as an option with it.
There are a handful of people who aren't
working. A lot of them have crippling
mental illness that's not being
addressed or managed in the way that it
needs to. And so until they have access
to health care, they're not going to be
able to get out from under that and
become a productive
>> contributor to the workforce. So, I
think work requirements will show that
people will either be exempted from them
based on the parameters of exemption or
that people are actually working, but
it's going to burden our county
government that are having to implement
these changes. And then there going to
be some people that are just going to be
too overwhelmed with life to do that
paperwork and get that paperwork in in a
timely fashion.
>> Can you say more about that? because it
sounds like what you're saying is that
really the vast majority of people who
are getting Medicaid, you know, post
expansion in in North Carolina are
working. So, if they are working, how do
they lose coverage with a work
requirement? Like, how does that work?
How does this paperwork piece of the
puzzle start to bear down on them?
>> Well, I think that it'll depend on what
state you're in and how they enforce
their work requirements. So, a lot of
that in North Carolina, I will say, is
TBD. I'm not sure how they're going to
implement it. I will say though, it's
hard enough to get people through the
enrollment process for Medicaid. And the
nuances of people who are self-employed,
like how does a farmer show that he
worked that week or that month? Nobody's
signing his paychecks, you know, no
one's he's not punching a clock
anywhere. So, how will they
operationalize it? Is it going to be a a
note from a neighbor that says they saw
him on the tractor five times? You know,
I think there's going to be some real
challenging
aspects of this for people that aren't
in a traditional punch the clock hourly
sort of job. And then I think there are
people whose health and written and
digital literacy are going to challenge
them and they're not going to be able to
actually functionally
follow through with the requirements.
Um, and I I think that's probably going
to be the most heartbreaking place that
we see it play out.
>> What do you mean by that exactly?
>> Well, you know, not everyone in this
country reads at a sixth grade level or
has access to broadband so that they can
upload the form and, you know, put in
the information they need to put in. Is
it going to fall on us to say, "Hey,
have you done your work requirement form
for the month?" or do we use our care
managers to make sure that we're doing
outreach and doing home visits and
taking devices to people so that they
can do their digital upload of their
time sheet or their payub? There are
plenty of people that aren't going to be
able to do this on their own. So, the
president's big domestic policy bill
passed. It's signed on July 4th. Where
were you when that happened and what
were you thinking? Well, I was watching
the Senate hearing and debate and I then
I watched the House and as it got closer
and closer to being clear that this was
going to pass, I just got increasingly
nauseated and sort of desparing. And so,
>> I will be truthful. I made an old
fashion and I went and got in my
hammock.
I couldn't take it. Um, and so
>> sometimes you need an old fashioned I
just I was I wasn't going to fix this.
like I'd been to DC, I'd done the I'd
done everything I could think to do, you
know, to help it not happen. Um, and so
then it became a sort of question of
what's the pivot? How do we move forward
and and mitigate the impacts? Can you
give me a picture of what you think that
will look like just on a practical
level? You know, you you saw the
pre-expansion world.
What do you see as the future in North
Carolina if this happens, you know, the
way that it's been forecast to happen
that that a lot of people lose care? So,
if our federal match was impacted, which
it could be, then we could see an
overnight elimination of expansion and
people will often go to emergency rooms
because hospitals can't turn them away
based on ability to pay. And so you'll
go for really routine things like an ear
infection or a urinary tract infection
because you know the hospital literally
cannot turn you away whereas there's a
fear that ambulatory clinics might turn
you away.
>> So you may see emergency rooms start to
fill up.
>> They'll fill up and they'll fill up with
really inappropriate care things that
don't need to happen in the emergency
room where it costs the system way more
money um to pay for. So those safety
nets stand to lose a tremendous amount
of their financial stability and I
suspect we'll see rural clinics, safety
net clinics, rural hospitals will
probably shut their doors u because they
won't be able to sustain financially.
Shannon, I'm wondering if this plays out
in this way, in the way that you kind of
expect and I think has been forecast by
many experts where you have people
losing coverage in this way and and
maybe you have care deteriorating in
some of these places. Do you think that
your patients, for example, will blame
the lawmakers who voted for this bill?
>> No.
>> Why not? There's just not enough of a
direct correlation to people's health
care needs in the moment and what
happened in DC
12 months before or 18 months before. So
you think there is a chance that the
folks who voted for the people who voted
for the bill that leads to them
potentially losing coverage will not be
seeing that that those people are really
responsible.
>> No. I had a patient come in uh the day
after the election and he said, "It's
about time we got to get government out
of healthcare." Well, ironically, he has
Medicare and he just
>> wow doesn't get it. And so, this is not
uncommon. This is a super complex system
of healthcare. I mean, I was at Medicaid
for 5 years. Every day I learned
something new around how Medicaid
worked. It It's very, very complex. I'm
not surprised that patients don't
understand all of this. I'm wondering if
you think they will blame anyone for the
loss in care, and if so, who would get
the blame?
>> It's hard to know. Um, I think people
often would get mad at the hospitals
because the hospitals weren't providing
them some service that they felt they
were due, not understanding sort of how
complex the system of health care is.
So,
I just don't think based on what I saw
before, it's I don't think the lawmakers
are the ones that are necessarily
going to bear the brunt of this,
especially with the timeline where they
have this stuff rolling out kind of
after the midterm elections.
It's interesting though because you know
Senator Tillis was such a loud voice
warning about the risks not just for
patients and people seeking care but for
Republicans that passing such measures
that would lead potentially to to such
vast cuts could be really damaging for
them politically. And I'm I'm wondering
if you see a possibility that state
lawmakers in North Carolina might also
be seeing a risk even though it's not
clear whether they will be blamed and
whether there will be some kind of fight
among them about how to potentially
salvage some of the expansion.
Yeah, I will say they worked really hard
across the aisle to get expansion
through. This was a tremendous team
effort and a lot of people
bent on their beliefs and what they'd
held on to for a lot of years to get
this through and to have it happen. And
so I think there will be a fair amount
of support from both sides to keep
expansion alive in North Carolina. I
don't know, maybe I'm overly optimistic,
but I do think that there was bipartisan
support for expansion. I got to stand on
the governor's lawn where he signed it
into law with, you know, the lead
Republicans standing
shoulder-to-shoulder next to him. It
feels
like surely they're not going to let all
that go away.
>> Do you feel like you're going to have to
wage that fight for expansion all over
again?
>> I hope not. There's so many other things
I want to fight about right now, but but
I will and I know a lot of people will,
especially now that we've seen the
benefits and there's so many stories
that people can tell all over the state
around the benefits of expansion and
what it's meant for their patients and
it's, you know, going to be a really
devastating thing to watch if it falls
apart. I'm wondering what you would say
to those lawmakers, not just in North
Carolina, but but across the country.
From everything you've seen in your
practice and in your career
over all these years, what do you want
them to know about this?
I think it's just so critical that they
see that their decisions
in Washington that are at this 50,000 ft
view. They lose track of the people on
the ground that are that are really
trying to get the American dream in
their lives and they're trying to work.
They're trying to pay their bills and
raise their children. And we keep
kneecapping them. We keep making it
harder for them to be successful. And
then we blame them for not being as
successful and needing supports. And how
humiliating and demoralizing that must
feel to people who are trying so hard.
>> And so asking, you know, our members, go
to your rural, deeply rural communities
and have real conversations with people
about their struggles.
I it just has to change their
perspective at some point.
Do you still talk to the patient that
you mentioned, the man who had the
really bad ulceration on his leg who's
who's 30 years old? Are you still in
touch with him?
>> I am. Yeah.
>> How is he doing? And have you talked
about any of this with him? Are you
worried about him?
>> Well, I'm definitely worried about if he
loses coverage. He had such little
confidence in the health care system. He
felt like he had been treated so poorly
as an uninsured person that I am sure if
he loses coverage, he will just fall out
of healthcare again.
He was done. He won't go back.
That deep Appalachin
culture of resiliency, self
sustainability, pride,
folks will just walk away from
healthcare and and we won't see them,
you know, until it's too late.
Shannon, thank you so much for coming on
the show. We really appreciate your
time.
It was my pleasure.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know today. On
Sunday, heavy rains returned to the part
of central Texas that was devastated by
flooding on July 4th. Forecasters said
there was a moderate risk of flash
floods and were concerned about the
impact of the rainfall there since the
ground is already so saturated.
In Kurville, city officials called for
the evacuation of all search crews who
were continuing to look for around 170
people still missing.
The death toll from the flooding rose to
129.
President Trump visited the area on
Friday. When asked by a reporter about
family's concerns that warning alerts
weren't sent soon enough, Trump
dismissed the question, saying it would
only be asked by a very evil person.
Homeland Security Secretary Christy
Gnome said on Sunday that the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, which her
department oversees, had responded
better to the Texas flooding than it had
to any other disaster in many, many
years.
She also pushed back against reporting
in the Times which found that thousands
of emergency calls to FEMA went
unanswered because of staffing cuts.
Gnome called the reporting fake news.
[Music]
And former President Joe Biden told the
Times he orally granted all the pardons
and commutations made at the end of his
term. He called President Trump and
other Republicans liars for claiming his
aids used a so-called autopen without
his authorization.
His comments come as the Trump White
House reviews a series of clemency
decisions made in Biden's final weeks in
office.
Today's episode was produced by Anna
Foley, Olivia Nat, and Caitlyn O'Keefe
with help from Diana Wyn. It was edited
by MJ Davis Lynn with help from Paige
Cowitt and Patricia Willins. Fact
checked by Caitlyn Love.
Contains original music by Alicia Et.
And was engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Our
theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben
Lansberg of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Kitro. See you tomorrow.
[Music]